Updated Fall 2009

University of Toledo Student
Government Bylaws
Article I: Legislative Branch
Section 1: Senate Responsibilities
Clause 1: The Student Senate shall have the powers to discipline,
impeach, and remove Student Government members pursuant to
Article IX of the Constitution.
Clause 2: The Senate may enact legislation on behalf of the University
community
Clause 3: The Senate shall approve rules and procedures for the
conduct of all Student Government elections set forth by the Election
Board, and to publish said rules prior to the election.
Clause 4: The Senate shall vote to approve appointments made by the
President, with a quorum obtaining a successful vote.
Clause 5: The Senate shall approve all recommendations to the
Student Judicial Board. All affirmative recommendations will be
forwarded to the Vice President for Student Life for their final
appointment before the end of the Spring Semester. The Senate shall
approve the appointment of Student Judicial Board Chairs.
Clause 6: The Senate shall approve all expenditures of Student
Government funds above those required for normal business
operations, and as defined in these bylaws.
Clause 7: The Senate shall enact legislation to carry out its powers and
responsibilities.
Section 2: Senate Membership
Clause 1: An elected College Senator shall serve a term of two years.
Clause 2: An elected At-Large Senator shall serve for the duration of
the academic year in which they were elected.
Clause 3: Should a Senator become unable to attend Senate meetings
for two consecutive semesters due to academic circumstances, their
seat shall become vacant.
Clause 4: Student Senators shall be required to participate in a
minimum of two (2) Student Government approved activities,
programs, or initiatives during both the fall and spring semester.
Clause 4.1: Student Government approved activities, programs,
and initiatives shall be defined by the Student Senate Steering
Committee.
Clause 4.2: Participation in any activities, programs, or initiatives
previously approved through legislation of the Student
Government shall be recognized as fulfilling this requirement.
Clause 4.3: The Student Body President shall be responsible for
discovering appropriate opportunities for these initiatives.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 4.4: Failure to participate in the required amount of
activities, programs, or initiatives shall result in penalties up to
and including impeachment, as deemed appropriate by Steering
Committee.
Clause 5: Delegates from fifteen student organizations shall be granted
seats in Student Senate, per the Constitution. The delegation shall be
announced annually no later than the second meeting of the incoming
Senate, and shall remain apportioned thus until the next year’s
delegation is announced.
Clause 5.1: Delegates shall attend all Senate meetings and serve
as liaisons between their appointing organization and the Senate,
representing the interests of their appointing organization in the
Senate, and reporting Student Government activity to their
appointing organization.
Clause 5.2: Delegates may not:
1.) Serve concurrently as a Senator.
2.) Serve as officers of the Senate, nor vote in elections of
Senate officers.
3.) Be considered in determination of quorum in dealing with
amendments to the Constitution and Bylaws, nor vote on
amendments to either. Delegates may debate
amendments.
4.) Serve as members of Senate committees or college
caucuses.
Clause 6: Seats for delegates shall be apportioned by the Student
Judiciary Committee on an annual basis with the following
considerations;
1.) SJC shall equally consider total active membership, total budget
allotment, diversity, and level of activity on campus.
2.) All above criteria shall be considered from the previous three
years.
3.) The interests of Greek organization shall be collectively
represented by a delegate from the Order of Omega, which shall
have a permanent seat in the delegation.
Clause 7: Delegates shall be subject to the Code of Conduct and
Standing Rules adopted by the Senate, and all other Student
Government governing documents.
Clause 7.1: If a delegate is impeached and removed, the
appointing organization shall not lose its seat, but shall instead
appoint a new delegate.
Section 3: College Caucus
Clause 1: Each Senator shall be a member of their college caucus.
Clause 2: The College Caucus shall address those interests and needs
which are particular to their college.

Updated Fall 2009
Section 4: Standing Committees
Clause 1: The Academic Affairs Committee shall represent those
matters concerning academic standards, relations between students
and faculty, and student grievances concerning academic issues.
Clause 1.1: The Chair shall serve as a student representative to
the Faculty Senate.
Clause 1.2: Should the Chair be unable to attend these meetings,
they shall be responsible for appointing another member of their
committee.
Clause 2: The Administrative Affairs Committee shall represent
students in those matters concerning relations with University
administration and infrastructural issues.
Clause 3: The Housing and Residence Life Committee shall represent
students in those matters concerning relations between students and
the Office of Residence Life, between students and off-campus housing
personnel, and other issues pertaining or arising from these areas.
Clause 4: The Student Services, Information, and Public Safety (SSIPS)
Committee shall represent students in those matters concerning
relations between students and the services available to them on
campus, to relations between Student Government and other student
organizations, the planning and operations of Student Senate
activities, informing students about campus issues and concerns, and
issues between various Student Government branches.
Clause 4.1: The SSIPS Committee shall also investigate and
recommend improvements upon policing, security, and other
pertinent safety issues for the campus and immediately
surrounding areas.
Clause 5: The Finance and Operations Committee shall represent
students in those matters concerning the Student Government budget,
approval of Student Government expenditures as required by these
bylaws, and in the review of internal workings and motions of the
Student Government.
Clause 5.1: The Finance and Operations Committee shall be
responsible for ensuring financial procedures are followed.
Article II: Executive Branch
Section 1: Cabinet
Clause 1: The Cabinet shall assist the Student Body President and VicePresident in carrying out the duties and programs of the Executive
Branch.
Clause 2: The Cabinet shall consist of committees to be established by
the President and Vice-President, and enacted through legislative Acts.
Clause 3: The Cabinet committees shall be chaired by Cabinet
Directors, who shall be appointed by the President and Vice-President.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 4: The Cabinet shall consist of individual members who serve
under these Cabinet Directors who are approved by the President and
Vice-President.
Clause 5: The Cabinet shall have a Chief of Staff.
Clause 5.1: The Chief of Staff shall be appointed by the President
and Vice-President
Clause 5.2: Cabinet Directors shall report directly to the Chief of
Staff.
Clause 5.3: The Chief of Staff shall report directly to the President
and Vice-President.
Article III: Judicial Branch
Section 1: Student Judicial Council
Clause 1: The Student Judicial Council shall have the final jurisdiction
and authority over all cases regarding controversies arising under the
Student Government Constitution and other related governing
documents.
Clause 2: Student Judicial Council shall serve as public defenders to
any students seeking representation before the Student Judicial Board.
Clause 2.1: Public defenders are responsible for informing
students of their rights and the judicial process, and representing
them to the best of their ability.
Clause 2.2: Public defenders shall be trained through the Dean of
Student’s Office, along with the Student Judicial Board.
Clause 3: In all cases and hearings undertaken by the Student Judicial
Council the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public
hearing, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, and
to face their accuser.
Clause 4: The Student Judicial Council shall establish its own rules of
procedure, which must then be approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
Student Senate, and shall publish and make these rules available to
the Student Body and all parties seeking redress before it. All rules of
the Student Judiciary Council shall ensure that fundamental fairness
and due process are maintained.
Clause 5: The Student Judicial Council shall advise Senate on the
constitutionality of all legislation.
Article V: Code of Conduct
Section 1: Each branch shall have the powers to determine what
constitutes the proper conduct of its members.
Section 2: These codes of conduct must include, but is not limited to;
1.) The number of excused absences allowed.
2.) The number of absences from committee meetings allowed.
3.) Definition of conduct unbecoming a member of that branch.

Updated Fall 2009
Section 3: Members found in violation of these codes of conduct may
be subject to disciplinary actions as defined in the individual codes of
conduct, as well as impeachment as defined in the Constitution.
Article VI: Special Committees
Section 1: Student Government Freshman Leaders (SGFL)
Clause 1: It shall be the purpose of this division of Cabinet to allow first
year students an opportunity to be involved in Student Government
Clause 2: SGFL Directors shall be established through appointment by
the President and Vice-President.
Clause 2.1: The SGFL Director shall approve incoming freshman
for membership in SGFL.
Clause 2.2: The SGFL Director shall contact incoming freshman
during the preceding summer to apply for membership.
Clause 3: SGFL members shall aid and assist the branches of Student
Government wherever possible.
Section 2: Other Student Government Groups/Committees
Clause 1: Students Offering Solutions (SOS) is a division of cabinet
which exists to facilitate students in problem-solving through proper
channels.
Clause 2: Ohio Student Government Association is a state-wide student
representative group, which the President and Vice-President shall
either attend or appoint a representative to.
Article VII: Legislation
Section 1: Legislation
Clause 1: Student Senate may consider three types of legislation;
Resolutions, Bills and Internal Motions.
Clause 2: Legislation shall be formatted according to the current
Standing Rules of Order at the time of submission.
Clause 3: Legislation requiring more than one reading shall be referred
to the appropriate committee.
Clause 3.1: A standing committee may hold a piece of legislation
for further review should it deem necessary.
Clause 3.2: A standing committee may not postpone a vote on a
piece of legislation more than twice without approval from the
full Senate.
Clause 3.3: After approval by a standing committee and the
steering committee, legislation shall be presented to Student
Senate for a second reading.
Clause 4: The Student Body President shall have five (5) business days
after receiving bills, internal motions, and acts to sign the legislation
into affect.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 4.1: Should the Student Body President decide to veto
legislation, the legislation shall be returned to the Steering
Committee.
Clause 4.2: Steering Committee may propose changes to the
legislation before re-submitting to Student Senate, where
legislation shall require a two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of all
active members to over-ride the veto.
Clause 4.3: Should the President fail to sign or veto legislation
within five (5) business days of receiving said legislation from the
Legislative Secretary of Senate, the legislation shall take affect.
Section 2: Resolutions
Clause 1: Resolutions shall be used for:
1.) Formal expression of opinion or intention of Student Senate.
2.) Spending allocations, including the annual Student Government
budget.
3.) Formation of Ad Hoc Committees, which are not limited to
Student Government for their membership.
4.) Requests for testimonies and hearings.
Clause 2: Resolutions must obtain an affirmative majority vote of
members present.
Clause 3: Resolutions require one (1) appearance before Student
Senate.
Section 3: Bills
Clause 1: Bills shall be used for the purpose of passing legislation
which requires programming.
Clause 2: Bills shall expire at the end of the session in which they are
enacted
Clause 3: Bills may contain a sunset clause calling for an earlier
expiration date than the end of the session.
Clause 4: Bills shall require two (2) appearances before Student
Senate, but may be enacted as emergency legislation through an
affirmative majority vote.
Clause 4: Bills must obtain an affirmative majority vote of members
present. Bills shall then be presented to the Student Body President
for approval.
Section 4: Internal Motions
Clause 1: Procedural motions include the Codes of Conduct for each
individual branch, the Standing Rules of Order for Student Senate, and
Acts, as well as any other procedural documents.
Clause 1.1: Procedural motions shall require an affirmative
majority vote of the total Student Senate membership.
Clause 1.2: Procedural motions shall require two (2) appearances
before Senate.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 2: Acts shall be used to establish Cabinet Committees, with the
sole discretion of proposing an Act given to the Student Body President
and Vice-President.
Clause 2.1: Acts must obtain an affirmative majority vote of the
total Student Senate membership.
Clause 2.2: Acts shall require two (2) appearances before
Student Senate.
Clause 2.3: Acts shall be added to the Bylaws under Article XII.
Clause 2.4: A Director appointed by the President and approved
by Senate shall be responsible for the implementation of each
Act.
Clause 3: Constitution and Bylaw amendments shall require a twothirds (2/3) affirmative vote of the total Student Senate membership.
Clause 3.1: Constitution and Bylaw amendments shall require
three (3) appearances before Senate.
Clause 4: After Senate approval Internal Motions shall then be
presented to the Student Body President for approval.
Article VIII: Annual Documents
Section 1: Standing Rules of Order for the Student Senate shall
establish standing rules which include, but are not limited to, process
for committee membership, special rules for debate, and methods for
the submission of legislation.
Section 2: The order of the Student Government Agenda shall be
included in the Standing Rules presented by the Chair at the beginning
of each session.
Article IX: Financial Procedures
Section 1: Financial Expenditures
Clause 1: An appropriation resolution shall be defined as an itemized
request for funds that states the separate costs of goods sold, services
rendered, work done, or the reallocation of funds.
Clause 2: Level 1 appropriation resolutions shall:
Clause 2.1: Be expenditures totaling less than $200.
Clause 2.2: Require a majority vote of the Finance Committee to
be considered approved.
Clause 2.3: The Student Body President reserves the right to veto
the bill within the Finance Committee.
Clause 2.3.1: The Finance Committee reserves the right to
override the veto with a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the total
active membership of Finance Committee.
Clause 3: Level 2 appropriation resolutions shall:
Clause 3.1: Be expenditures totaling more than $200.
Clause 3.2: Require a majority vote of the Finance Committee
and a majority vote of Student Senate for approval.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 3.3: Be liable for a Presidential veto, with standard
presidential veto procedures applied.
Clause 4: Level 3 appropriation resolutions shall be defined as
emergency expenditures, and shall:
Clause 4.1: Require only the Student Body President signature for
approval.
Clause 4.2: Immediately be subject to an audit by the Finance
Committee.
Clause 4.2.1: Should the Student Body President be found
to be abusive of this method of expenditures, they shall be
subject to impeachment.
Clause 5: Should a Level 1 or 2 appropriation resolution not receive
approval, it can be brought before the Student Senate meeting for
approval by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of present membership of Student
Senate.
Clause 5.1: Should the Finance Committee fail to act within five
business days of receiving a Level 1 or 2 appropriation
resolution, the resolution shall be automatically submitted to
Student Senate for approval.
Clause 6: Should the expenditure exceed the approved amount the
difference shall be subject to approval by the Finance Committee.
Clause 6.1: Should the extra expenditure not be approved, the
spender may be held liable for the difference.
Clause 7: The Finance Committee shall approve all personnel actions
pertaining to the Student Government office operations, including, but
not limited to, the hiring of contracted employees and pay
adjustments.
Clause 7.1: Termination of employees shall not require approval
by the Finance Committee.
Clause 8: An appointed Cabinet member shall maintain a Student
Government ledger, showing all expenditures to date for the current
fiscal year.
Clause 8.1: The ledger shall be made available to the Finance
Committee on a monthly basis, and as requested.
Clause 9: The Student Body President shall present the annual budget
for approval by the first Student Senate meeting of the fall term.
Section 2: Financial Audit Procedures
Clause 1: The Finance Committee shall be required to audit all Level 3
expenditures.
Clause 1.1: The Finance Committee shall determine the necessity
of an audit by a simple majority vote of present members.
Clause 1.2: Should an audit be deemed necessary, the accused
shall be informed of the pending audit hearing at least one (1)
week in advance.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 1.3: A minimum of three (3) Finance Committee members
must be present to conduct an audit.
Clause 1.4: The audit will consider the following criteria:
1.) The program/event purpose and results.
2.) Student participation in the program/event.
3.) The variance between funds requested and used.
4.) Unforeseen costs not on the initial expenditure.
5.) Justification for the additional expenditure.
Clause 2: The hearing shall be conducted as follows:
Clause 2.1: The Finance Committee and the accused shall meet
at the established meeting time.
Clause 2.2: The Finance Committee shall take turns asking
questions of the accused. Questions shall be restricted to the
above audit criteria.
Clause 2.3: At least one (1) member of the Finance Committee
shall take notes.
Clause 3: Upon the completion of each audit, a report shall be
compiled and submitted to Student Senate for review.
Clause 3.1: The report shall contain a brief overview of the
expenditure reviewed, the accused, and the opinion of the
Finance Committee based on the audit criteria.
Clause 3.2: The report shall be compiled within ten (10) business
days of the audit hearing.
Clause 3.3: Minority opinions shall be included.
Clause 3.4: Student Senate shall not be allowed to alter the
report.
Clause 3.4.1: Student Senate does reserve the right to
include an addendum.
Clause 3.5: The final report shall be kept on file in the Student
Government office for a minimum of three (3) academic years.
Article X: Elections
Section 1: Election Timeline
Clause 1: General elections shall be held between within the eleventh
and thirteenth weeks of spring semester.
Clause 2: Newly elected members shall take office the Tuesday of the
fifteenth week of spring semester
Clause 3: The outgoing Senate shall hold their final meeting the
Tuesday of the fifteenth week of spring semester. Immediately
following the adjournment of the outgoing Senate, the newly elected
Senate will convene and elect a Chair, Vice-Chair, and standing
committee Chairs.
Section 2: Election Board Committee
Clause 1: The Election Board shall consist of seven members, not
including the chair.

Updated Fall 2009
Clause 2: Members of the Election Board shall be appointed by the
President, and approved by a majority vote of the active membership
of Student Senate.
Clause 3: The members of this committee shall forfeit the right to be a
candidate in the year they serve on the Election Board.
Clause 3: The Election Board Chair shall be appointed by the President,
and must then be approved by a majority vote of members present at
Student Senate.
Clause 3.1: The Election Board Chair can not have been part of a
contested election the previous year.
Clause 4: There shall be an Election Board Advisor appoint by the
President and approved by Senate.
Clause 5: The Election Board shall be responsible for:
1.) Formulating the rules for the election.
2.) Publishing these rules in a manual to be approved by a majority
vote of the active membership of Student Senate.
3.) Enforcement of these rules.
Clause 6: Appeals of the Committees decision shall be made to the
Student Judiciary Council, whose decision shall be final.
Clause 7: The Election Board shall be in place by the end of the fall
semester.
Clause 8: No tickets may campaign until the passage of the Election
Board manual for the year in which they seek office.
Article XI: Amendments
Section 1: Members of Student Senate, the Executive Branch, and the
Student Body may propose amendments to these Bylaws through the
same methods as proposing amendments to the Constitution.
Section 2: Amendments to the Bylaws shall only require two (2)
appearances before Student Senate.
Article XII: Acts

