Procedural Motion
-A procedural motion to define the Standing Rules for The 47th Session University of
Toledo Student Government.
Author: Heather Engle
Let the following be adopted as the standing rules for the University of Toledo Student
Senate:
1. Causes for censure shall include:
1.1 Disruptions of procedure. Disruptions of procedure shall be defined as any
knowing action that hinders or obstructs the orderliness, efficient procedure,
and/or effectiveness of our legislative body. Such actions include, but are not
limited to: objecting to a motion with no intention of further debate, repetitively
speaking without being called upon by the Chair, resorting to vituperative ad
hominem attacks that shame our body, or obstructing the passage of a piece of
legislation through a committee on account of personal animus, etc.
2. All personal communication devices will be on silent or turned off.
2.1 All Senators will refrain from using any electronic device during a
presentation by a guest speaker. All Senators will give the guest speaker their
entire
3. All votes on legislation will be taken by roll call, unless the chair deems it unnecessary,
or unless a motion to approve by acclamation passes.
3.1If a roll call vote is deemed unnecessary, votes can be taken by standing, voice,
or ballot votes at the discretion of the Chair.
4.Debate will adhere to the following rules:
4.1. Debate will taken the following format:
4.1.1 The author of the legislation or motion (“the matter”) will present to
the legislation and answer questions
4.1.2 Motions will have a three (3) minutes time limit to explain and
answer questions. The committee to which the matter was previously
referred will be allotted three (3) minutes to present its recommendation
and answer questions.
4.1.3 Any guest may speak on the matter for three (3) minutes prior to
senate debate.
4.1.4 Guests may continue to offer points of information and answer
questions at the discretion of the Chair but may not otherwise participate
in debate.
4.2 Yielding the floor is not permitted.
4.3 Should the President, Vice-President, or Advisor wish to speak during debate,
they may request to do so prior to debate. Their request may be granted by a
majority vote of present members.
5. All agenda items for Senate must be submitted in electronic format to the Legislative
Secretary no later than 5:00 pm on Monday for consideration at the general meeting on
the following Tuesday.

6002-P-082311

5.1 Legislation that has been sent to a Standing Committee will remain on the
agenda as old business. Once the Committee has made all necessary changes the
legislation will be placed before the Senate The Senate will then vote to hear the
legislation with the changes or to hear it as it was originally written.
5.2 The Steering Committee shall have jurisdiction over the items on the weekly
Senate agenda.
5.3 The Steering Committee will act as a rules committee for the Student Senate,
in order to set the standards for debate.
6. Each Senator, excluding members of the Steering Committee, will be assigned by the
Chair to one Student Senate Standing Committee.
6.1 Committee meetings times will be set for the entire semester and will not be
altered without the prior consent of the Steering Committee.
6.1.1 Standing committee meetings will be held once weekly.
6.1.2 Steering committee will meet weekly Monday evenings. The
meeting time will be announced in Senate and will be posted in the
Student Government office.
6.2 Committee Chairs will submit reports of attendance to Standing Committee
meetings electronically to the Chair or Vice-Chair.
6.2.1 If a Committee Chair fails to submit a committee’s report he/she will
be penalized one “absence” as defined in the Code of Conduct.
6.2.2 In the event that a Committee Chair is absent to a Standing
Committee meeting, the committee members will appoint a temporary
chair for that meeting. The formally elected Committee Chair retains
responsibility for delivering a report and attendance to the Executive
Committee.
6.3 At the Chair’s discretion, a Senator may be able to opt out of serving a
committee time should the following conditions hold:
6.3.1 If a newly approved at-large senator has class during all current
Senate Standing Committees’ meeting times AND
6.3.2 changes to any current Senate Standing Committees’ meeting times
would be inconvenient to the committee members.
7. Legislation shall be assigned a serial number by the Legislative Secretary for purposes
of internal tracking.
7.1 Serial numbers shall be in the following format: “CNNN-Q-MMDDYY”
7.1.1 “C” shall correspond to the committee to which the legislation was
originally referred. Committees are assigned the following numbers:
Academic Affairs as “1,” Administrative Affairs as “2,” Housing and
Residence Life as “3,” Student Services/ Information/ Public Safety as
“4,” Finance as “5,” Steering as “6,” and miscellaneous (not applicable to
a specific committee) as “7.” Any proposed amendments to the
Constitution or Bylaws will be assigned to “8.”
7.1.2 “NNN” shall correspond to the chronological order in which the
legislation was submitted, with the first as “001”and the second as “002,”
and so on.

6002-P-082311

7.1.3 “Q” shall correspond to the type of the legislation, with Resolutions
as “R,” Bills as “B,” proposed Constitution and Bylaw amendments as
“A,” and Procedural Motions as “P.”
7.1.4 “MMDDYY” shall correspond to the date on which the legislation
was first read on the Senate floor, with two digits each for day, month, and
year. I.e., “August 4, 2011” would read “080411.”
8. A footer shall be added to each piece of legislation by the Legislative Secretary
containing a history of the legislation. I.e., “First reading at Student Senate- Tuesday,
April 18, 2010; referred to Finance Committee by Student Senate – Tuesday, April 18,
2010; Passed with amendments by Finance Committee – Thursday, April 20, 2010;” etc.
9. Any portion of these standing rules may be suspended by the Senate upon a 2/3 vote of
the total present membership of Senate.
9.1 The motion for suspension of these rules will be exhausted on the one purpose
specified in the motion.
10. All official meeting business must be concluded by 10:55 pm ET, with
announcements and final roll call being completed by 11:00 pm ET.
10.1 Should it be deemed necessary that a meeting continue pass 10:55 pm ET,
the meeting may be extended by a majority vote of the present members of the
Senate.
10.2 Under no circumstances should a Senate meeting last longer than 12:00 am
ET.

Read 1st-8/23/11
Read 2nd-8/30/11
Passed 8/30/11

6002-P-082311

