A Bill to establish a “Whatcha Want Wednesdays” Program
Authors: Matt Rubin and Jordan Maddocks
Sponsors: Melanie Muniz
I. Defining the Problem
a. Currently Senators don’t have a personal relationship with various
groups of students on campus
b. Poor communication hinders Senator’s ability to write legislation that
directly relates to the student body’s wants and needs.
c. There is a barrier between Student Government and the Student Body,
directly affecting proper legislation being passed to address popular
issues and the Student Body issues being heard.

II. The Solution
a. An established “Whatcha Want Wednesdays” Program here at the
University of Toledo would inform students that Senators and Cabinet
members are concerned about their wants and needs, that Senators
and Cabinet members are continually working to better represent their
issues in meetings and through legislation, and are taking a positive
step in creating an open relationship between Student Government
and the Student Body. This program would officially start Wednesday
September 14, 2011.

III. Methods of Solution
a. Therefore let it be resolved that there be a mandatory Senator, elected
and at large, and Cabinet member requirement to serve their office
hours in replace of at least one week as involvement in the program.
Student Government Members will wear the “Whatcha Want
Wednesdays” t-shirts and openly talk to students, recording all
information received.
b. Also let it be resolved that the Vice Chair of Senate will be in charge of
making sure Senators complete their allotted time and report to the
Chief of Staff. Senators and Cabinet will report results to the vice chair
of Senate, who will then inform the Senate Body during his report.

7003-B-083011

c. Student Government will purchase the “Whatcha Want Wednesdays”
shirt at $5.25 per shirt. 2XL and 3XL shirts will cost $7.25. Elected
senators will receive a shirt automatically while senators-at-large must
attend four meetings before receiving a shirt. Fifty shirts will be
purchased.
d. Information will be compiled into a database and shared with Student
Government members and the Office of the Student Experience.
Read on 8/30/11, 9/06/11, 9/13/11
Tabled on 8/30/11

Passed on 9/06/11 Friendly Veto 9/08/11

