A Bill to establish a “Whatcha Want Wednesdays” Program
Authors: Matt Rubin and Jordan Maddocks
Sponsors: Melanie Muniz
I. Defining the Problem
a. Currently Senators don’t have a personal relationship with various
groups of students on campus
b. Poor communication hinders Senator’s ability to write legislation that
directly relates to the student body’s wants and needs.
c. There is a barrier between Student Government and the Student Body,
directly affecting proper legislation being passed to address popular
issues and the Student Body issues being heard.

II. The Solution
a. An established “Whatcha Want Wednesdays” Program here at the
University of Toledo would inform students that Senators are concerned
about their wants and needs, that Senators are continually working to
better represent their issues in meetings and through legislation, and
are taking a positive step in creating an open relationship between
Student Government and the Student Body. This program would
officially start Wednesday September 7, 2011.

III. Methods of Solution
a. Therefore let it be resolved that there be a mandatory Senator, elected
and at large, requirement to serve their office hours in replace of at
least one week as involvement in the program. Although Senators at
large do not technically have office hours they will also be held
accountable to partake in the program. Student Government Members
will wear the “Whatcha Want Wednesdays” t-shirts and openly talk to
students, recording all information received.
b. Also let it be resolved that the Vice Chair of Senate will be in charge of
making sure Senators complete their allotted time and report to the
Chief of Staff.
c. Student Government will purchase the “Whatcha Want Wednesdays”
shirt at $5.25 per shirt. Elected senators will receive a shirt
7003-B-083011

automatically while senators-at-large must attend four meetings before
receiving a shirt. Fifty shirts will be purchased.
d. Information will be compiled into a database and shared with Student
Government members and the Office of the Student Experience.
e. A liaison for “Whatchu Want Wednesday” will be appointed by the
Executive Branch and approved by the Student Senate.
Read on 8/30/11, 9/06/11
Tabled on 8/30/11

Passed on 9/06/11

