University of Toledo Student
Government Constitution
Article I: Names, Affiliations, and Mission
Section 1: Name
This organization shall formally be known as The University of Toledo
Student Government (UTSG), and informally known as Student
Government (SG).
Section 2: Structure
The University of Toledo Student Government shall consist of three (3)
main branches; the Legislative Branch, Executive Branch, and Judicial
Branch.
Section 3: Mission
We, The University of Toledo Student Government, recognize each
individual student’s right to the best possible education, proper
representation, and proactive advocacy. With these ideals at heart, the
UT Student Government shall strive to achieve these goals for students
on all campuses, as well as striving to create a student centered
university, enhance and promote diversity, and maintain open and
easily accessible communications with students at all times. Student
Government will further work to promote student involvement in the
surrounding community and the City of Toledo through charitable
outreach, community involvement, and democratic engagement.
Section 4: Purpose
The purpose of The University of Toledo Student Government shall be
to uphold those values listed in our mission statement. Activities and
programs sponsored by this organization shall keep with the
organizations stated objectives.
Section 5: Discrimination Policy
The University of Toledo Student Government does not categorically
deny membership to any individual based on race, creed, ethnic
identity, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, color, veterans’ status,
age, or presence of a disability as defined by law.
Article II: Legislative Branch
Section 1: Legislative Powers and Responsibilities
Clause 1: All legislative power for The University of Toledo Student
Government shall be vested in the Student Senate.
Clause 2: The Student Senate shall oversee all actions undertaken at
The University of Toledo or pertaining to The University of Toledo.

Clause 3: The Student Senate shall establish all rules and procedures
for Student Government.
Clause 4: A simple majority of the voting members must be present to
constitute a quorum.
Section 2: Student Senate Membership
Clause 1: The University of Toledo Student Government shall be open
to all University of Toledo students through direct election of The
University of Toledo Student Body, or appointment by the Student Body
President and approval by the Student Senate.
Clause 2: All members of Student Senate shall maintain a cumulative
GPA of 2.5 and must not be found guilty of a violation according to The
University of Toledo Code of Conduct during the individuals’ term.
Clause 3: Student Senate shall consist of fifty (50) seats.
Clause 3.1: Fifty (50) seats shall be distributed among the
colleges in proportion to the number of students enrolled in each
college of The University of Toledo.
Clause 3.1.1: The Student Judicial Council shall formulate
the number of proportioned seats by February of each
academic year.
Clause 3.1.2: College seats shall be elected each year from
the various colleges within The University of Toledo.
Clause 3.1.3: Elected Senators shall hold the seat for two
(2) sessions.
Clause 4: If for any reason a Student Senate seat is vacant, a student
may apply for an At-Large by following the rules set forth in the
Standing Rules of that session.
Clause 4.1: Students applying to become Senators-at-Large must
meet all requirements for general membership.
Clause 4.2: A Senator-at-Large must be approved by a majority
vote of the total active membership of Student Senate.
Clause 4.3: A Senator-at-Large must be approved by the Senate
a minimum of six weeks before the end of the session.
Clause 4.4: A Senator-at-Large shall not be confirmed by Senate
prior to the second meeting of each new Senate session, with the
exception that any student made ineligible to run for Senate due
to membership in Election Board or Presidential or VicePresidential candidacy be eligible for immediate approval.
Clause 4.5: A Senator-at-Large shall hold their position until the
end of the session.
Clause 5: Voting members shall be defined as members who are
currently enrolled UT Students.
Article III: Executive Branch
Section 1: Executive Powers and Responsibilities

Clause 1: The Office of Student Body President shall hold all executive
power within The University of Toledo Student Government.
Clause 2: The Student Body President shall serve as the chief
spokesperson of The University of Toledo Student Government.
Section 2: Executive Branch Members
Clause 1: All members of the executive branch shall maintain a
cumulative GPA of 2.5 and must not be found guilty of a violation
according to The University of Toledo Code of Conduct during the
individuals’ term.
Clause 2: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall be
elected on a single ticket by The University of Toledo Student Body.
Clause 3: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall serve for
one (1) session of The University of Toledo Student Government.
Clause 4: Should the Presidency become vacant for any reason, the
Vice-President shall assume the role of President.
Clause 5: Should the Vice-President position become vacant, the
President shall nominate a Vice-President, who shall then have to be
approved by a two thirds (2/3) vote of the total active membership of
Student Senate.
Clause 6: Should vacancies occur in the offices of President and VicePresident, the Chair of Student Senate shall convene the full active
membership of Senate at the earliest possible time, or no more than
10 business days of the academic calendar, for the purpose of electing
a new President.
Clause 6.1: The new President must be approved by an
affirmative two-thirds (2/3) vote of the total active membership
of Student Senate, as well as a majority vote of the Student
Judicial Council.
Clause 6.2: The President, upon assuming office, shall appoint a
Vice-President.
Clause 7: The Chair shall assume the office of Student Body President
during any vacancy until a new President is appointed.
Clause 7.1: Should the Chair be unable to fulfill this role, the
position shall be filled by the following succession; Chief of Staff,
Vice-Chair of Senate, and Legislative Secretary of Senate.
Article IV: Judicial Branch
Section 1: Judicial Powers and Responsibilities
Clause 1: Student Judicial Council shall have final jurisdiction and
authority over all formal complaints regarding controversies arising
under the Student Government Constitution and other related
governing documents.
Clause 2: The Student Judicial Council shall serve as advisors to
students seeking representation before the Student Judicial Board.
Advisors are responsible for informing students of their rights, the

judicial process, and representing them to the best of their ability.
Advisors shall be trained through the Dean of Students Office, along
with the Student Judicial Board.
Section 2: Judicial Branch Members
Clause 1: All members of the Student Judicial Board shall maintain a
cumulative GPA of 2.5 and must not be found guilty of a violation
according to The University of Toledo Code of Conduct during the
individuals’ term.
Clause 2: The Student Judicial Council shall consist of nine (9) Student
Justices appointed by the Student Body President, and shall be
approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the total active membership of
Student Senate.
Clause 3: Student Justices shall serve for two (2) sessions of The
University of Toledo Student Government.
Article V: Student Government Committees
Section 1: Committees of Student Senate
Clause 1: Student Senate standing committees shall meet weekly
during the academic year to review legislation and serve as the
primary observer in their assigned areas for The University of Toledo
Student Government.
Clause 2: The Academic Affairs Committee shall deal with all academic
issues and matters, such as grievances and standards, as well as
relations between students and faculty.
Clause 3: The Administrative Affairs Committee shall deal with relations
between students and The University of Toledo administration, and
issues pertaining to local, state, and federal governments.
Clause 4: The Finance and Operations Committee shall deal with
expenditures of The University of Toledo Student Government and any
legislation directly related to the function of Student Government.
Clause 5: The Housing and Residence Life Committee shall deal with
on-campus and off-campus resident issues.
Clause 6: The Student Services, Information, and Public Safety
Committee shall deal with services administered to The Student Body
by The University of Toledo, The University of Toledo informational
systems, and the safety of the students or visitors of The University of
Toledo.
Section 2: Committees of the Student Body President
Clause 1: The Student Body President shall appoint a cabinet to aid in
carrying out executive responsibilities, but is not required to unless
mandated by legislation.
Article VI: Student Government Officers
Section 1: Student Senate Officers

Clause 1: Officers of Student Senate shall be elected during the first
meeting of the new session by a simple majority vote of the total
active membership of Student Senate.
Clause 1.1: The Chair of Student Senate shall be a member of
the incoming Student Senate. The outgoing Chair shall preside
over the election of the new Chair.
Clause 1.2: Should any position be vacated during the academic
year, special elections shall be held and shall require a simple
majority vote of the total active membership of Student Senate
to be confirmed.
Clause 2: The Chair of Senate shall:
1.) Conduct the general session of Senate;
2.) Serve as the official representative of Student Senate when
needed;
3.) Refer legislation to the appropriate committee after its first
reading in Senate;
4.) Assign Senators to committee’s while accommodating the
interests of the Senators where possible;
5.) Implement orientation programs for new Senators;
6.) Attend to all logistic and scheduling needs for Senate
meetings;
7.) Schedule guest speakers as necessary;
8.) Step down temporarily if they wish to speak in debate;
9.) And shall only vote in case of a tie.
Clause 3: The Vice-Chair of Senate shall:
1.) Assume the duties of the Chair should they be unable to
attend;
2.) Have the duties of Sergeant-at-Arms as stated in Robert’s
Rules of Order, Revised;
3.) Maintain and enforce attendance policies;
4.) And serve as the recruitment and retention officer for Student
Senate.
Clause 4: Standing Committee Chairs of Student Senate Committees
shall:
1.) Preside over Committee meetings and attend to all logistical
needs;
2.) Ensure referred legislation shall be properly addressed, and
shall report to the Legislative Secretary on the status of said
legislation;
3.) And submit a written report for each meeting.
Clause 5: The Legislative Secretary shall:
1.) Prepare the agenda and make it available to Senators by the
beginning of the meeting at the location of that meeting.
Copies of new legislation shall be provided to Senators prior to
the meeting.

2.) Update the Constitution and Bylaws to include any approved
amendments;
3.) Update the Student Government website to include all
legislation, minutes, and other information deemed necessary
weekly;
4.) Be responsible for preparing final copies of legislation to be
signed by the necessary officers, and to place these into the
Senate archives.
5.) Be responsible for maintaining the Senate archives;
6.) And help orient new Senators.
Clause 6: The Recording Secretary shall:
1.) Call roll when necessary;
2.) Record the results of all votes;
3.) Compile records of attendance at both committee and general
meetings;
4.) Act as Parliamentarian of Student Senate;
5.) And help orient new Senators.
Clause 7: College Caucus Leaders shall:
1.) Be elected by those within their caucus by the second
meeting of each new session;
2.) Be the official spokesperson of the college from which they
are elected;
3.) Give a monthly report to Senate;
4.) Be enrolled in the college which they represent.
Section 2: Officers of the Executive Branch
Clause 1: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall serve as
the officers for the Executive Branch of The University of Toledo
Student Government.
Clause 2: The Student Body President shall:
1.) Hold the primary power of appointment within Student
Government unless otherwise stated in the Bylaws;
2.) Have the power to veto legislation;
a. A Presidential veto can be overridden by a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the total active membership of Student
Senate.
3.) Be responsible for the efficient management of the Student
Government office;
4.) Serve as the chief spokesperson for Student Government and
the Student Body;
5.) Faithfully execute this Constitution and all enacted legislation.
Clause 3: The Student Body Vice-President shall:
1.) Assist the President in carrying out the powers and duties of
the Executive Branch;

2.) Assume the office of President should that office become
vacant.
Clause 4: The Student Body Vice-President shall advise and aid in the
completion of the Student Body President’s duties.
Clause 5: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall be
responsible for the formation of a Cabinet which will assist them in the
completion of the duties and programs.
Clause 5.1: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall
create Acts for each position within their Cabinet, which shall
then be submitted to Student Senate for approval.
Clause 5.2: The Student Body President and Vice-President shall
nominate individuals to fill these positions, who shall then appear
before Student Senate for approval.
Section 3: Officers of the Judicial Branch
Clause 1: The Chief Justice shall officiate all business related to
operating the Student Judicial Council.
Clause 1.1: The Chief Justice is charged with swearing in every
member of Student Government. The Chair of Student Senate
shall swear in the Chief Justice.
Clause 1.2: The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the Student
Body President and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
total active membership of Student Senate.
Section 4: Officer Eligibility
Clause 1: Only currently registered UT students may hold office.
Officers shall not be on academic or disciplinary probation.
Article VII: Student Government Advisor
Section 1: Dean of Students
Clause 1: The Dean of Students shall be the advisor for Student
Government.
Clause 2: An alternative advisor may be selected at any time from The
University of Toledo’s faculty or administration by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of all approved members of Student Government.
Article VIII: Referendums
Section 1: Student Government referendums
Clause 1: Student Government shall be bound by referendum votes of
the Student Body which are taken in any official Student Government
election.
Clause 2: Student Government may initiate a referendum for the
Student Government election through a bill, and by two-thirds (2/3)
approval of Student Senate.
Section 2: Student Body referendums

Clause 1: Students may initiate a referendum for the Student
Government election through a petition obtaining no less than 200
student signatures.
Clause 1.1: Petitions must consist of a student signature and
matching rocket id number.
Clause 1.2: Petition signatures are subject to confirmation by the
Office of Student Activities.
Article IX: Impeachment and Removal
Section 1: Impeachment
Clause 1: Student Government members may only be impeached
through an impeachment hearing.
Clause 1.1: An impeachment hearing shall be carried out through
the Student Senate as a whole and presided over by the Student
Judicial Council.
Clause 1.2: An impeachment must obtain a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the total active membership of Student Senate.
Clause 1.3: The impeachment shall then be sent to the Student
Body President for approval.
Clause 1.3.1: If the Student Body President should veto the
impeachment, It shall then be sent back to Student Senate
where it must obtain a three-fourths (3/4) affirmative of all
active membership.
Clause 2: The Chief Justice shall handle all logistical issues pertaining
to the impeachment hearing.
Clause 3: Student organizations may remove their representative at
any time through procedures as established within their own
organization.
Article X: Amendments
Section 1: Legislative Branch Amendments
Clause 1: Any Senator may propose amendments to this Constitution.
A two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of the total active membership of
Student Senate shall be required to adopt the amendment.
Section 2: Executive Branch Amendments
Clause 1: The Student Body President and Vice-President may propose
amendments to the Student Government Constitution
Clause 1.1: To be submitted for consideration, the amendment
must obtain sponsorship from at least one Student Senator.
Clause 1.2: The amendment must obtain at least a two-thirds
(2/3) affirmative vote of the total active membership of Student
Senate to be adopted.
Section 3: Student Body Amendments

Clause 1: The Student Body shall be able to propose amendments to
the Student Government Constitution through referendum
Clause 1.1: Amendments may be added through referendum
following normal referendum procedures.
Clause 1.2: To become effective, the referendum amendment
must receive a two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of all students
who vote in the election.
Section 4: Amendments
Clause 1: It is further understood that if this organization desires at any
time in the future to change in any way the provision of this charter,
that before such action is taken, the organization will submit for
approval to the Student Activities Committee and the Office of Dean of
Students every detail of the desired changes to be made.
Article XI: Ratification
Section 1: The Constitution shall be considered ratified upon the
completion of three (3) readings in Student Senate, and after obtaining
a two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of the total active membership of
Student Senate, and approval by the Student Body President and the
Dean of Students office.

