A Bill To Establish Student Government Week
Author: Senator Jimmy Momenee
Sponsor: Senator Heather Engle
Section 1: The Problem
1. Student Government does not have a large presence on campus, meaning
many students are unaware of Student Government or how Student
Government represents and advocates for the student body.
Section 2: The Solution
1. Student Government shall establish a Student Government Week to be held
the week starting November 14 through November 19.
2. The events will be:
a. Monday
a.i. Sit Down, Speak Up will entail student government spending
up to $70 on coffee and advertise the event where our student
constituency can come into our Student Government office,
enjoy a free cup of coffee, and sit down with one of our
Senators or executive branch members to discuss any issues
that they may have that we can resolve.
a.ii. More Monday will entail Student Government members
encouraging all students to participate in Rocket Monday.
b. Tuesday
b.i. Voter Registration Drive will entail Student Government
members walking around the Student Union and Centennial
Mall to try to register students to vote in the upcoming national
and local elections.
b.ii. What Is Student Government? Meeting will entail holding a
second meeting to inform interested students about what
Student Government is and what we do on campus. The
meeting will be held at 7 pm directly before our normal
Student Government meeting time. Student Government will
also try to visit with as many individual student organizations
as well to try to raise Student Government Awareness.
c. Wednesday
c.i. Whatcha Want Wednesday? Push will encourage all
members of Student Government to get out and complete a
Whatcha Want Wednesday session. HIGH ROPES COURSE
d. Thursday
d.i. (currently open for ideas)
e. Friday

7009-B-101111

e.i. Rocket Friday will entail Student Government members
encouraging all students to participate in Rocket Friday.
f. Saturday
f.i. Bowling Social for all Student Government members.
3. Any member who participates in these events will be excused from their
office hours for the week.
4. Any member who participates in the Sit Down, Speak Up or the Voter
Registration Drive will have those hours count towards their mandatory
service hours for the semester.
Section 3: The Implementation
1. Sit Down, Speak Up will be advertised through the various Student
Government Twitter accounts and Facebook page and the Communications
Director will create a flyer for the event. The $70 will come from the Student
Government budget. The event will run from 10 am until 4 pm.
2. More Monday: all student government members will encourage their fellow
students to wear spirited Rocket gear and also wear spirited attire themselves.
3. Voter Registration Drive: The Chair will obtain 100 copies of the voter
registration forms for Lucas County. After the drive, the Chair will make
certain that these forms will be turned into the proper office. The drive will
run from 11 am until 3 pm.
4. What Is Student Government? Meetings will be held by the chair, who will
also make the proper room reservation.
5. Whatcha Want Wednesday? Push encourages all Student Government
members to participate in Whatcha Want Wednesday this week, even if the
member has participated in one already.
6. Rocket Friday: all student government members will encourage their fellow
students to wear spirited Rocket gear and also wear spirited attire themselves.
7. Bowling Social for all Student Government members at 7 pm at Bowlero
Lanes on Monroe Street. Student Government members will pay for their own
expenses regarding the bowling social, as well as providing their own
transportation.

Read 10/11/11, 10/25/11
Passed 10/25/11

7009-B-101111

