Procedural Motion
-A procedural motion to define the Code of Conduct for The 47th Session University of
Toledo Student Government.
Author: Heather Engle
Let the following be adopted as the Code of Conduct for The University of Toledo
Student Senate:
Section 1: Conduct Policy
1. Any Senator found in violation of the University of Toledo Student Code of
Conduct will be subject to impeachment and removal by the Senate body.
2. Every Senator must conduct themselves with the utmost moral and ethical
integrity both in and out of the Senate chamber and Student Government
office.
a. Failure to do so may result in sanctions being imposed against the
Senator.
b. This policy also includes any electronic communication between that
Senator and the Senate body.
c. During Senate meetings, the Sergeant at Arms shall have the authority
to discipline unruly Senators without warning.
c.i. At the discretion of the Sergeant at Arms discipline may
include loss of voting privileges, loss of speaking privileges, or
expulsion from the meeting.
d. When taking part in Student Government activities, Senators must
conduct themselves in a tolerant and non-offensive way.
Section 2: Attendance Policy
1. If a Senator-at-Large accumulates two (2) unexcused absences from Senate
meetings and committee meetings during one (1) full term of Senate, they are
automatically removed from their position following the third unexcused
absence regardless of the reason.
a. Four unexcused absences may be made up through speaking at
constituency meetings, participating in Senate service projects,
speaking with administrators, and other activities and projects. All
must be approved by the Senate Steering Committee.
b. These projects will count for ½ of an absences, unless the Steering
Committee approves otherwise.
2. If an Elected Senator accumulates three (3) unexcused absences from Senate
meetings and committee meetings during one (1) full term of Senate, they
shall be placed on probation by the Senate Steering committee.
a. Continued absence shall be grounds from impeachment.
3. Excused absences shall be limited to two per term. Once the two excused
absences have been granted then all subsequent absences will be considered
unexcused. An excused absence shall be defined as:
a. An excused absence as defined by university regulations

6001-P-082311

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

b. An absence due to a departmentally scheduled exam
c. An absence that the Senate Steering Committee deems of merit
All absences are to be considered conditionally unexcused. For an excuse
absence to be granted, the Senator must show reasonable cause for absence.
The Senator must present his/her case to the Chair within forty-eight (48)
hours for a determination of the status of the absence in question. If this
absence is not reviewed before the next Senate meeting, the absence will
automatically be considered an unexcused absence regardless of the reason.
Once a Senate meeting has begun, a Senator may only leave the Senate
meeting under extreme and rare circumstances, unless previously discussed
with the Chair or Vice-Chair.
Two roll calls will be taken during the meetings of the Student Senate.
Missing both roll calls constitute as one (1) absence. Missing one roll call will
result in one-half absence.
Each Senator must serve on exactly one (1) of the Legislative Committees
(Academic Affairs, Administrative Affairs, Finance and Operations, Housing
and Residence Life or SSIPS). Committee Chairmen shall be responsible for
holding a meeting between each Senate meeting. In the event that a
Committee Chairman considers meeting unnecessary, he or she shall report
such to the Chairman and announce the cancellation at the prior week’s Senate
meeting
a. Excused and unexcused absences must be reported to the Vice Chair at
or before the following steering meeting or Senate meeting, whichever
is first.
b. Members of these committees who miss a meeting without excuse will
receive a ½ unexcused absence.
c. Members of these committees who miss a meeting with an excuse
deemed acceptable by the chair of the committee and the Vice Chair of
Senate will receive a ½ excused absence.
All absences shall remain permanently attached to Senators through the entire
Senate session.
Senators may hold an “inactive” status if any of the following apply:
a. If a Senator has an internship, or cooperative education, or has an
academic course during Senate meeting time, or is participating in any
other academic enrichment program that will not allow the senator to
fulfill their responsibilities, and
b. If a Senator requests “inactive” status, subject to approval by the
Senate Steering Committee.

Section 3: Dress Code
1. Senators should dress in a tasteful fashion when taking part in Senate and
Student Government related activities.
2. Senators shall not be permitted to wear pajama pants, sweat pants, or other
exercise gear to Senate meetings or Student Government related activities.
3. Extremes in fashion may result in the Sergeant at Arms asking the Senator to
leave and return in a more presentable manner.

6001-P-082311

a. Any senator has the right to appeal his or her decision to the Senate
Steering Committee.
Section 4: Senator Office Hours
1. Elected Senators and At-Large Senators are required to spend a minimum of
two (2) hours in the Student Government office each week and publicize those
times to their constituents in the College they represent.
a. Office hours will be communicated to the Chair by the last day to
add/drop for the semester.
b. Failure to complete office hours may result in penalties, including
impeachment.

Read 1st-8/23/11
Read 2nd-8/30/11
Passed 8/30/11

6001-P-082311

